<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="appendix" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Appendix</h2>
			<p>This translation of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">La Chartreuse de Parme</i> has been made from the reprint in two volumes of the first edition (Paris, Les éditions <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Grès et Cie. MCMXXII), with reference also to the stereotyped edition published by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">MM.</abbr> Calmann Lévy and to the reprint issued by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Flammarion in his series, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les meilleurs auteurs classiques</i> (1921). I am also indebted to the extremely literal version by Signora Maria Ortiz (Biblioteca Sansoniana Straniera⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">La Certosa di Parma</i>⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. C.</abbr> Sansoni, Firenze, 1922), which has thrown a ray of light on several dark passages.</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Chartreuse</i> was written in (and not a distance of three hundred leagues from) Paris, and in the short interval between November 4, 1838, and December 26 of that year. So much the author reveals in a note, which I do not translate: “The <abbr>Char.</abbr>, made 4 novembre 1838⁠–⁠26 décembre id. The 3 septembre 1838, I had the idea of the <abbr class="eoc">Char.</abbr> I begined it after a tour in Britanny, I suppose, or to the Havre. I begined the 4 <abbr>nov.</abbr> till the 26 décembre. The 26 <abbr>dec.</abbr> I send the 6 énormes cahiers to <abbr>Kol.</abbr> for les faire voir to the bookseller.” His object in pretending to have written the book in 1830 may have been to establish a prescriptive immunity from any charge of traducing the government of Louis-Philippe; if so, it is by a characteristic slip that he speaks of having written it <em>towards the end of</em> 1830.</p>
			<p>Kol., otherwise Romain Colomb, Beyle’s executor, relates in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Notice Biographique</i> prefixed to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Armance</i> that in January, 1839, while the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Chartreuse</i> was going through the press, a cahier of sixty pages of the manuscript was mislaid. Unable to find it among the mass of papers that littered his room, Beyle rewrote the sixty pages, and the new version was already in type when he told Colomb of his loss. Colomb at once searched for and found the missing cahier, whereupon Beyle, “stupefied by the ease of my discovery, dreading, in a sense, the sight of this manuscript, would not even glance over it, much less compare it with the pages that had taken its place.”</p>
			<p>It was published in March, 1839. In the same year, Beyle began to correct, reduce and amplify the whole work, before he was moved by Balzac’s criticism to condense the first fifty-four pages into four or five. Three copies thus annotated are in existence, one of which has been reproduced in facsimile in an extremely limited edition: (Paris, Edouard Champion, 3 <abbr>vols.</abbr> 1921⁠—100 copies only.) In 1904 <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Casimir Stryienski reprinted in the first volume of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Soirées du Stendhal Club</i> (Mercure de France) the two fragments of which a translation follows. The first is intended for inclusion in Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, in the brief account of Fabrizio’s convalescence at Amiens. Colonel Le Baron, the wounded officer whom he met and left at the White Horse Inn at the end of Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, is now reintroduced as returning to his family at Amiens, and a story is told them which supersedes the account of General Pietranera’s death in Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. The second fragment is a small expansion of the already over-long Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>.</p>
			<p>Visitors to Parma will look in vain for most of the architectural monuments which met the gaze of Fabrizio. The Torre Farnese has never existed, though it may have been suggested, as to mass, by the huge fragment of the Palazzo Farnese at Piacenza, as well as by the Castel Sant’Angelo in Rome, and as to origin, by the story of Parisina and Ugo d’Este, told in English by Gibbon and Byron. In appearance, it would have been not unlike the tower, also damaged by an earthquake, which stands in the background of Mantegna’s fresco of the <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Martyrdom of Saint James</i>, in the Church of the Eremitani at Padua. The problem of how a road running out of Parma to the south could lead directly to Sacca and the Po is as insoluble as that of the guarded permission given to Fabrizio in 1815 to read the novels of Walter Scott.</p>
			<p>The Steccata of course exists, and the Church of San Giovanni, but the latter is singularly bare of monumental tombs. There is even a Charterhouse, at San Lazzaro Parmense, though it has escaped the attention of Baedeker. There were Farnese, but the last of them died, of the pleasures of the table, in 1731; a portrait of him in his corpulence may be seen by the curious in the Reale Galleria in the Piletta⁠—another large Farnese Palace also unfinished. There is indeed a Cathedral, but there is no Archbishop, and the Bishop’s Palace is an untidy piece of patched-up antiquity.</p>
			<p>It is probable that Beyle was led to place the scene of his story at Parma, which, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Rome, Naples et Florence</i>, he had dismissed, not unjustly, as <i xml:lang="fr">ville d’ailleurs assez plate</i>, precisely because there was not, in 1838, any reigning <em>dynasty</em> in that State. The Duchy of Parma was held and admirably governed by Marie-Louise, the wife and widow of Napoleon, from 1815 until after Beyle’s death in 1843, when she was still in the prime of life, being by some years his junior. Suddenly, in 1847, she died. The Bourbon dynasty, which had been transplanted to the brief Kingdom of Etruria, and in 1814 had been placated with the Republic of Lucca as a temporary Duchy (which Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> had finally sold, a few months earlier, to its legal heir, the Grand Duke of Tuscany), returned, and rapidly converted Stendhal’s fiction into historical fact. Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> was almost at once obliged to abdicate. His son, Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, proceeded to emulate the career of Ranuccio-Ernesto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> until, in 1854, he met a similar fate. His widow, a daughter of the Duc de Berri, then acted as Regent for her son Robert I, until in 1859 the Risorgimento swept them forever from their Duchy. Duke Robert died in 1907, the father of twenty children, one of whom, Prince Sixte de Bourbon-Parme, showed in the late war some reflection of the spirit of Fabrizio del Dongo, as the curious English reader may find in my translation of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">L’Autriche et la paix séparée</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Austria’s Peace Offer</i>, London, Constable and <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr>Ltd.</abbr>, 1921). Another is the Empress Zita, while a third has reestablished the Bourbon dynasty in Northern Europe by becoming the father of the Hereditary Grand Duke of Luxembourg.</p>
			<p>Francesco Hayez, the Milanese painter immortalised by his decoration of the palazzo Crescenzi and by his portrait of Fabrizio del Dongo, died at a great age in 1882, having outlived the date appointed by Beyle for his own immortality.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">
					<abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">C. K. S. M.</abbr>
				</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
