<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>By the local custom, borrowed from Germany, this title is given to every son of a Marchese; <i>Contino</i> to the son of a Conte, <i>Contessina</i> to the daughter of a Conte, etc. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The speaker is carried away by passion; he is rendering in prose some lines of the famous Monti. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Silvio Pellico has given this name a European notoriety: it is that of the street in Milan in which the police headquarters and prisons are situated. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the curious Memoirs of M. Andryane, as entertaining as a novel, and as lasting as Tacitus. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Italy, young men with influence or brains become <i>Monsignori</i> and <i>prelati</i>, which does not mean bishop; they then wear violet stockings. A man need not take any vows to become <i>Monsignore</i>; he can discard his violet stockings and marry. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pier-Luigi, the first sovereign of the Farnese family, so renowned for his virtues, was, as is generally known, a natural son of His Holiness Pope Paul III. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For this translation of La Fontaine's fable I am indebted to my friend Mr. Edward Marsh, who allows me to reprint the lines from his <i>Forty-two Fables of La Fontaine</i> (William Heinemann, Ltd., 1924). <cite>—<abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">C. K. S. M.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
